and the overall thing have a good advanced program
for a major where there would be some busting back
and forth between the institutions. This was the
idea, to try to strengthen these colleges by any
way that we could. And I tried to set up these
consortia in Little Rock, where there were three
institutions, in Texas, where there were six
institutions scattered over a larger area in
Memphis, in northern Mississippi, in Alabama.
Those are the main ones that seem to respond to the
idea. The Ford Foundation had promised support
for any that was ready to move on. I saw the greatest
promise originally in Little Rock, where all
three institutions were right together. They
were a few miles apart.
I ran into the Methodist Church,
the major institution in Little Rock, Philander
Smith, a Methodist institution. The Methodist
Church was not willing surrender its autonomy in
this situation. We had this back and forth and I
could understand their feeling there because you
see what we were trying to do in Little Rock was to
sort of impose a university structure on the three
things which of course would be controlled by the
blacks. found out the extent to which the land of
Smith was controlled by whites. That was one
thing. And, in fact, they had even asked me to come
into Little Rocks, into Little Rocks, where I
knew, I knew the sources of, knew where the money
was in Arkansas, and I was in consultation with
Rockefeller. He was the governor of the state at
that time. Of course, his foundation had gone. and
developed many programs, or has since.
Incidentally, my nephew is president of that
foundation in Arkansas, Tom McCrae. But I
was hopeful that that would be the one to get it
started. And they had asked me, at least
administratively, to set this thing up. Well, it
didn't work. I can't blame the Methodist Church.
No, it was just that the opposition to it came more
from the Methodists than from Philander Smith,
because that was the strongest of the
institutions.
It had most to lose, I think, by a program of
cooperation like this. So the one that really
emerged more and more with a less binding and a more
flexible kind of organization, particularly
because the institution was separated, was in
Texas. And I, oh,
as I look back on it, there are many things that I
wish I had done, but it was not obvious at that point
that Texas was going to be the one, or just how the
structure should be set up. The thing I was trying
to do in the first meeting that I organized and
called in Texas for this purpose was to involve the
major universities in the structure, too. For
instance, the first meeting we had was at SMU in
Dallas, and all of the black college presidents
and the representative board members from each of
them, and also presidents of the predominantly
white institutions. Now, at that time, it was an
interim president, I think it was Rogers, he was
here in journalism, he was acting as interim
president at North Texas. He was involved, the
president of SMU was there, the president of the
chancellor of TCU, and so forth. And what we worked
out at that point, was a structure which had a board
of trustees. It would be autonomous, but it would
have representatives, equal, equal
representatives with major universities in the
area. Obviously, the center would have to be
Dallas because of the institutions. These black
colleges are all in the North Texas area? Well,
they go down as one in Dallas, one in Waco, one in
Austin. one in Marshall in East Texas, one in
Tyler, one in Great Sandy, which is near Tyler,
Jarvis Christian College, which is closer
related to TCU there. So there were six of them. I
could go either east on the interstate or south on
the interstate from Dallas. So Dallas was the
central place for it. So while I was gone at one
point, the thing was actually organized. And some
power structure thing was set up which placed the
power in the hands of the six black college
presidents. And that alienated some of the
predominantly white university because, see,
these were the institutions that had the
resources. The North Texas group was eager and
enthusiastic about it and were willing to,
without pay, to turn loose some of their staff and
professors to work in these various programs and
so forth. And it, well, Actually, it was the board,
but there was an executive committee of the board
consisting
of the black college presidents. And then a little
later, there was a long history here of
development of this thing. I was simultaneously
trying to develop others. But this is the one that
really emerged. And the presidents were ready to
move. The Ford Foundation was right there, ready
to back it. And they were going to town. And since I
had been involved in the middle of this, and I'd
been on the staff of the National Council of
Churches for eight years, we had had New York. And
it would have meant a lot to us to be able to come back
to Texas, and particularly to Denton. So we
figured, okay, we can live in Denton, and I can
commute to Dallas, set up the office in Dallas,
which we did an exchange party,
which was close by and wasn't too bad commuting. So
we did that, and another white man who had been
involved in the organization, he was the business
manager type, the business manager at Austin
College, came in as vice president, I was
president, and then we soon were able to get a
fundraising man, a black, terrific young fellow,
who is now with the United Negro College Fund. All
of this publicity you see for UNCF, he's the one who
organizes it and puts on the, what do they call
them, the extravaganzas and this kind of thing.
But UNCF, that's United Negro College Fund. We
were related to them initially, but we were not
dominated by them. We had a separate structure
here. Well, this had quite a history for a while
here. I was with this group for four years. During
that four years,
the four colleges that were not accredited in that
group were accredited. We were able to bring in
millions of dollars in support. We were able to get
programs from HUW, the federal programs Well, we
were just turning out proposals. This was my real
role, to write proposals and then to try to get them
accepted either by foundations or by HEW
or in some cases individuals who were interested
in this whole thing. And sometimes the greatest
problem was getting them accepted on black
colleges. But more and more, as we were able to
bring in funds, we were encroaching upon the
autonomy of black institutions. Same thing we had
run into with Methodist Church in Little Auburn.
We were running into the CME Church, Christian
Methodist Episcopal Church. the AME Church, the
AME Zion, African Methodist Episcopal, and
African Methodist Episcopal Zion, so these are
all separate Methodist denominations, as well as
the American Baptist Convention, which was
Bishop College in Texas.
Autonomy is a very difficult thing to surrender,
even a slight area of autonomy in planning for six
institutions at the same time, in developing
programs. Here was a good example of this. We had a
grant from HUW. Oh, I think we had about $500,000 or
$600,000 to develop a strong business program for
the six institutions, not just secretarial
science. They all could do that. But really to have
a good business major in every one of these,
because obviously one of the areas that needed to
be worked on in the black community was to have
business school graduates. I mean, people who
could really organize and structure businesses
in the black community or otherwise. Well, I was
working with people at North Texas on this one.
John Carroll, he is retired from the School of
Business. He was acting dean for a while. He was a
good friend. Well, I got to know him at that time
through Brock, Horace Brock here. He was a good
friend. But at any rate, John Carroll was going to
organize this thing. He was given leave of absence
in North Texas for a full year to work full time on
it. He was going to be able to get some high level
faculty people at North Texas and at SMU and TCU to
work specifically on some of these programs. And
it was, I think,
a Bachelor of Business Administration, it wasn't
really called that in all of these, but to develop
that kind of program. Only one of the students had
anything resembling that. So, this was an all-out
effort. Well, we got the grant, we got the
personnel, we were all gung-ho and ready to go.
Then we had a meeting, I guess this was No, it was in
Austin. And John Carroll was there, he presented
his plans, and so forth. And my presidents,
through the funding, said we will use these funds
to apportion them to each individual
institution. except for a
total of four appearances. And we will not have
this break. And I had to go back and tell John
Carroll that he was fired before he could get to
work. Boy, that hurt. I could understand their
position. Each one of these presidents was
fighting the budget battle. They all had
deficits. They had to scrounge for every dollar
they could get. So the idea was we could maintain
the appearance of this program by apparently
channeling these grants to the business
administration or the business departments of
each one of these schools, and then having a small
program, retaining Dr. Carroll, if he would work
on this basis,
have some training sessions and so forth, and use
some of these high-level faculty people at the
universities and so forth, really more for the
benefit of the faculty than for the students, and
to try to enroll some of the faculty in some of the
graduate programs in North Texas. Well, this was
disheartening because it was a real solid program
that was worked out. I guess that was the beginning
of the end, as far as I was concerned, because they
were so preoccupied. And this was by necessity. I
understood this. So preoccupied
with making the budgets and the deficits. It was
impossible, really, to get beyond that. Well, at
the same time, we, with the young black man, Melvin
Shaw, who was vice president for development and
stuff, we had raised, in matching grants, Ford
Foundation would match funds we could raise in
Texas. A very ambitious structure. We had visions
and had commitments of six million dollars to form
a university structure for these six
institutions.
It was pretty far out. It was trying to move too far,
too fast.
visited several schools, particularly in
California, to try to learn as much about this kind
of overall structure at the University of the
Pacific, which is more or less on the Oxford
England basis of having small autonomous
colleges. But still, there's a university
structure that is overall While there's autonomy
in undergraduate education and so forth, the
university structure would deal with the
cooperative things between them. Also, the
University of California Center. Is that the one
that you helped? Yes. I'd been a consultant in
establishing the religious program there, which
. But at any rate, this was based on small,
autonomous colleges as well. And so I visited both
of those to see if we could find some structural
means by which we could overcome this concern with
loss of autonomy in these institutions. And we
simply were not able to do it. I guess I went too far
in trying to go too fast. I lost the confidence of
the black presidents, and I miss those nuances
that I should have been listening for. I don't
know, maybe a white man can never get those, but it
all ended very unhappily in that Here we were ready
in the structure of our little organization with
three executive staff people, about a half dozen
secretaries and so forth. We were just an office
and of course all the everything that we did was
related to the college. But we insisted that we
could raise the funds but only on the basis of
maintaining the control of the funds and the
universal structure, and working from that
basis. Because the foundations and HEW also were
simply not willing. There had already been a
number of incidents. Of course, the structure and
the planning of a traditional black college is
very different, auditive accounts and so forth
that we are accustomed to predominantly quite. It
wasn't a question of dishonesty as much as it was a
question of power within the structure of the
black church, within the structure of the black
colleges. So while we were working with the
business administration, with the business
departments of the colleges, trying to get
competent, business managers in the college,
vice presidents for business or administration
or something like that. We had accomplished a good
bit, and on the basis of some of the changes made,
you see, there had been grants both to the
individual colleges and other ones. Well, during
all of this time, Bishop College was, of course,
this was the major institution of these six. It was
the strongest, best financed, the best campus,
newest
buildings. And it was the one that was pursuing its
own program with the Ford Foundation
to strengthen it. Well, at the same time, we had
this program worked out with the Ford Foundation
commitment to go ahead with it if we could match
bucks within the state of Texas. We were working
with the Brown Foundation, the Moody Foundation,
the Sid Richardson Foundation, and this young
fellow we had, Melvin Shaw, was really doing the
job. because he was bearding these people
constantly. And I would turn out, churn out the
proposals. Some of them, I think, were more for
appearances than anything else. But we were in a
hurry. I mean, we had to do something. We knew the
time was limited. I'd been here nearly four years,
and as I pointed out, something people didn't
think was funny. about how much tenure does a white
president of a consortium of black colleges have.
I figured I would have 40 years before leadership
could be turned over to a bunch of blacks. I guess I
was a necessary entree into the white community
initially, but of course blacks by this time had
full entree into In fact, they were the favorite
spokesmen for one of the colleges, two
foundations, and even the staff at HEW about this
time that dealt with these things was black. A very
lovely lady who had been president of Bennett
College was the head of the section at HEW that
dealt with that college. sure shipped a lot of
proposals her way. But the point came where they
simply were not willing to surrender this
autonomy. And there was a very specific rivalry
here as far as Bishop College was concerned. They
were pursuing the same funds as Bishop College. We
had a severance of ways here. In a sense, I was
fired. In a sense, I was unwilling to continue on
the basis of what seemed to me to be
misappropriation of funds. You see, it was my
name, and my integrity, and the integrity of the
structure. that would raise these funds, and then
once they got them, they could be used for other
purposes. And legally, this was, I mean, I was
getting into difficulty here, too, because I
couldn't control the funds. And this was a great
tragedy. It was a personal tragedy for me, even as
much as the Hampton Sydney experience, because
here was the other side of it. And it turned out to be
a tragic experience for the colleges as well,
because three of
these presidents were subsequently indicted. I
didn't, I stayed out of it from that point, once I
was out of it. I don't know, I guess there were some
ways that I could have I could have called it on
this, but after all, I've been working for five
years with the National Council in Texas to try to
do something
for these colleagues,
to put them in the mainstream, help them come to the
mainstream. I think we accomplished some things,
but we failed. most critical
and important to us. Since that time, of course,
Mission College has fallen into new lanes, and
this was the strongest. Probably the strongest
remaining one was Houston Tillotson in Austin,
because of the strong president they had through
the years, John McKeith. Jarvis Christian
College which
is related to TCU, which is sort of a subsidiary of a
white college. Never has been in all kinds of black
institutions. They've trained a lot of black
leaders, I think. They've had two presidents. And
then Wiley College in Marshall. president who was
there when I was there when I was well he was he was
the chairman of the board actually he left under
some cloud and then the man who came in was indicted
who really had nothing to do with it but he was
carrying around policies It's just a different
world, and this is one thing I think both the courts
and otherwise have to recognize about these
institutions. They have operated as arms of the
black church, and the black church functions in a
sort of a power way. But I don't think any or many,
certainly not many, of these people have ever
feathered their own nests. I think they've been
honest and responsible in these terms. But how
they use funds and whether it is subject to an audit
by Pete Martin and Mitchell or these big
accounting firms, We were trying to get their
books in order so that they could be straightened
out in this way, and what was basically an honest
operation be put on the books so that it could be
demonstrated to be by the white man's standards.
White man's way of doing things was by audits.
Black man's way of doing things was by
personalities,
relationships,
power structures within the church. So they've
had to conform, you see,
to get money from any point of service and really to
exist legally. And it's been a difficult time. I
think the black colleges since that time, they had
a renaissance. They were able to Not just the ones
that we worked with particularly, but
because of the federal programs and others. For a
while, they were able to move right along. But
inevitably,
integration was taking place in higher
education. And again, these schools I have become
more remedial institutions. There's still a real
role for them, I'm sure. And they graduate,
and there are many people still. And
basically, they're still accredited by the
Southern Association. But there are problems.
And there are
problems that can be alleviated fondly over a very
close relationship with other higher education
institutions. So they're still acting at the
community college level, really? Yeah, they're
four-year institutions. But of course, when you
consider
the fact that a great many of the students are
there, the whole first two years have to be
remedial programs. while
the more select
of those came from close to Falkland, Texas and
other integrated institutions. Of course, the
public schools are largely integrated now, but
when you get a school system like Dallas's, where
some of the schools are primarily black student
bodies, then you have, well, There's still
remedial training that needs to be done to do what
kind of college it's at. Of course, this happens in
white schools, too. I mean, for instance, gym. He
did pretty well in high school, played in the Honor
Society and so forth, but he had to learn to read
when he got to Davidson. I mean, he had to take the
speed reading course, which was kind of a remedial
reading. But Jim had never read for fun. This was a
thing. Most of us who came along in the last
generation, for entertainment
we would read. it's not so so much true for this this
generation of students and uh read rapidly well
this is the kind of thing that has to be done in our
educational system throughout and it's just
magnified several
times those colleges as a whole just i've never
been able to get that broad sense of purpose that
you all were trying to bring in just because they
were getting so caught up in the, as you say, the
deficits and trying to deal with the different
cultures. Right. Well, this is the thing that we
had to fight and deal with and where we lost the
fight. I guess that's why I focus upon that because
this was the point of our defeat. Their
preoccupation with surviving. This is not only
with the presidents and the administrators of the
college, but with the churches that they are
responsible to or related to. This is their
institution still. And this is, well, there's
just no way they can divorce themselves from it in
terms of control. in
terms of autonomy, even if it's impossible to have
adequate educational
programs on that basis. Because you see, the point
was reached, and this was the real point where the
government programs and the foundation programs
were no longer, as it's often been expressed
pouring
money down the rabbit
hole.
If they couldn't see the specific results of the
money that they gave, that was all they could do.
And if they could see it in terms of programs, and
graduates, and fields, which were important for
the improvement of the black situation,
educationally in other words, And the
foundations
were
turning off.
And of course, the whole federal program now was
the Reagan administration. They reversed the
Civil Rights Revolution in four years. But any
rate, it was the defeat of everything that was
important to me, at least. Important to a lot of
people. That's another story,
I guess. But the black, it's hard to kill an
institution. It's just that they're
not progressive. They've become largely
remedial institutions with more and more
don't
seem
to be able to be solid. They've turned inward,
rather than outward. Of course, what we would hope
to realize, they can turn outward in terms of
support, in terms of a radical education. North
Texas was the only state institution that was
involved in that, concerning with the University
of Texas or any other school? Yes. Now, others were
involved primarily with the institutions, the
local institutions. For instance, University of
Texas never did. I never did get much response from
them, but they have had programs with Houston
Public Schools. And Baylor with Paul Quinn, this
is, never has been, much has never been involved.
But Paul Quinn is a Baptist school? No, it's a
Methodist school. Oh, it's a Methodist school.
Now Baylor was more sympathetic toward, toward
the College of Dallas, Bishop, because it's
Baptist. Nothing really practical,
incidental, locally, in some cases. But North
Texas was the primary one, I think.
It's because some of us were involved here,
the people that I knew here, who were interested
and were able to get into Woodlands. North Texas
was in on the ground floor. Austin College was real
interesting because they were not a university.
But their president
was very much involved in things. He was very
disciplined with the things. But the way they did
in East Texas, in Commerce, was they were setting
up programs both with Wiley College and with Texas
College. Was that leadership base working in the
school strong? Were they from the South, or were
they from the North, like as you're educated in
Princeton, plus your background. That's what I
meant with the other. You're speaking of the
whites or the blacks? The people that were
involved at North Texas, the people that were
involved. I think both, both. For instance, the
people that I was able to enlist in North Texas had
primarily a Texas background, Southern
background, East Texas, North Texas. But, of
course, they were educating institutions all
over the country. No, there's never been any
regional
bias here. Of course, in the South, back in the old
days, the more progressive elements were trying
to do things about black education for a long time,
and some of the strong leadership in this movement
has come from whites in the South. And a lot of the
people who moved to these black campuses, for
instance, in Miles College in Birmingham, an
outstanding place, I forget his name, moved down
from Yale, and set up a program
in, well, this was one of the media programs, and so
forth. And there was a lot of publicity about this,
but it was a genuine thing that he did. He moved down
there and stayed
until his retirement. And there have been a lot of
instances of this kind of thing, not as well as
public instances of it.
people from the major institutions have felt
enough call and enough
responsibility to get involved and to move onto
these campuses to do the job that he's doing. Did
you have any interaction with Reverend Price from
Lexington, Virginia? I had read an article about
that. He was in the Presbyterian Church, and I had
read something about him talking at the General
Assembly of the Southern Presbyterian Church,
and he went out on a limb with that, and I think it was
like May 28. Nice. Yeah, you're talking about a
missionary from China. Yeah, he was a moderator,
had been moderator of the General Assembly.
Right, right. He was, yes, he was very much
involved in the early Did
he work with your wife's family there when you were
in China? Yes, yes they had in China. They knew he
was primarily in Shanghai and administrative
roles in China and then he was there even after the
communists came in. didn't know which price you
were talking about. Yes, he was very much in the
picture then and was certainly a leader in any kind
of progressive or liberal ideas. He was one of the
leaders in the church as far as integration and of
the two branches of the church, and I guess it was
probably that 54th General Assembly, wasn't it,
where he was so much ahead of us? Well, this is the
one that I attended, and what came out of that
meeting was a very strong Yeah.
Were those missionaries, the missionaries that
came back a strong force in trying to... I think by
and large they were. Some of them were very
conservative theologically, and unfortunately
this came as a sort of a conservative-liberal
issue. Of course, conservative in the South means
conservative in social questions. There are two
different questions entirely. Theological
conservatism and liberalism, and social
liberalism and conservatism. Of course, more
recently, those things have become so polarized
liberal as a liberal and a conservative as a
conservative in the church or anywhere else
without regard to some of the nuances in the
situation. But the missionaries, by and large,
did support integration. They did support the
reunion of the two churches. Of course, they had
worked in China or everywhere else with
Presbyterians of the other stripe.
Did
you work at all with Russ College of Mississippi,
Holly Springs, Mississippi? Yeah. That was where
my father went down from here in Cato State to do an
exchange program with their campus ministers.
Yeah. And he's mentioned Northern Mississippi.
What was the date of that? I was, my mother was
pregnant at that time. I think it was the spring of
1963. 63. Well, I had probably visited there,
let's see, it was about a year or so before, and we
were talking about, let's see, there are two
colleges in Holly Springs, and then there are
three in Memphis, which is not too far away. Right.
And then there were two near Jackson. That
scattering,
we didn't pursue too far. That kind of separation.
But we talked to the people there. Of course, they
were eager to get in on something. But, yes, I
remember how
they spread this very well. I just spent, I think, a
couple of days there. We talked about a lot of
things. But that must have been about a year or more
ago. I've been browsing through some picture
books. Now, you were living there. Well, my... My
dad was the campus minister of the Wesley
Foundation up in Mankato. And they came down to
spend some time with my students. Well, were you
bored then? No, I was just getting ready to work. A
few months ago. Right, 63, 63. Yeah, that's Jim's
birthday. A year or two. Yeah. Yeah, your wife
would say she was thinking Jim was 23 the other day.
She lost it. Yeah. Easy to lose a year. She probably
could grow up real fast.
Yeah, well, you know, it's hard to... sort of gauge
time like that, from this perspective, because
it's been a while.
Well, I appreciate it very much.
It's time to talk. It's a privilege for me to rehash
some of his old history. It's been a lot of byways
and I suppose there's no, you do something like
this with a strong moral feeling, but there are
always compromises. There's nothing black and
white about it in terms of morality. A lot of the
things I think I would have done differently. I
don't know, maybe it had to be confrontation. the
confrontation of people like Martin Luther King.
Of course, he was always insistent that it was
non-violence and so forth, and it was to a certain
extent, but it was confrontation. It
was antagonism. And some of the things I
deliberately, well, let me go on and mention a
couple of other things. Some of the things I
deliberately didn't participating because I
wasn't really with him. One of them was the Selma
March in which Martin Luther King was present. Of
course, they were deliberately trying to bring on
violence for the reaction that it would get for the
cause of equality and freedom and what have you,
knowing that the rednecks in Alabama would oppose
it with violence and so forth. But one perspective
that I got on this, I have some cousins in Selma,
Alabama. They are part of the medical community
there. And they were considered the medical group
there, the group of doctors and hospital, were
very concerned. They thought there was going to be
even more violence than there was because all of
the rednecks in the surrounding
country had been harming themselves and making
all kinds of outlandish statements. And when it
looked as if it was inevitable, this march to
Montgomery from Selma, uh what the local and this
this is on the records of the medical association
they went to the organizers
of this and said look there's going to be violence
we are here to serve those who need help we're not
going to take any position on what you're doing
As far as that concerns, our only
purpose is to provide medical help, because we
think it's important. And be free to come to us, to
the hospital, anything that happens, because we
are determined to minimize this as much as
possible and help in every way that we can. Well,
they were turned down because of a fight. Because
they were fearful, I think, that there would be
some kind of betrayal. They really trusted them.
Well, there were two people killed there. One was
Reed,
James Reed, I think. He was a graduate of Princeton
Seminary.